As an example of a one way ANOVA model,
we'll look at the plant growth data NR.
All we need to do to extract the data is
use the data function on PlantGrowth.
And then we can immediately
look at the documentation.
To learn a little bit about this dataset.
The PlantGrowth data contains results
from an experiment to compare yields.
That is measured by plant weight for
plants that were grown under a control and
two different treatment conditions.
There are 30 experiments and
there are two variables.
The first variable is
the weight of the plant, and
the second is the group to
which that plant was assigned.
It's either ctrl, trt1 or trt2, you can
check this source for more information.
Let's take a look at the PlantGrowth data.
As we said, the first column
contains the weights of the plants,
the second column tells us
which group that plant was in.
Because the explanatory variable group
is a factor and is not continuous.
We're going to choose to visualize
the data with box plots rather than with
scatter plots.
So we'll create a box plot of the weight.
Against group using the PlantGrowth data.
Here are the box plots.
The box plots summarize
the distribution of the data for
each of the three groups,
ctrl, trt1, and trt2.
For example,
this line tells us the median of yield for
the ctrl group is a little
bit higher than 5.
And most of the distribution is
located between 4.5 and 5.5.
It appears that trt2 has
the highest mean yield, but
it might be questionable whether
each group has the same variance.
We're going to assume that
is the case in our modeling.
Again, let's begin modelling
with a reference analysis
using the non informative flat prior for
linear model in R.
We'll call it lmod,
which is a linear model of weight.
Versus our factor variable group.
And of course the data are PlantGrowth.
Run this linear model and
create a summary for it.
And here we get the posterior
mean estimates for
the three parameters governing the mean.
The first group the intercept,
refers to the control group and
it is the mean yield for
the control group, about 5.
These next two parameters
give us the modification
to this original mean to obtain
the mean for treatment group one.
So, the mean for
treatment group one would be about 4.6 and
the mean for treatment group two would be
about 5.5, we're adding to the baseline.
With the ANOVA models,
you can also calculate the ANOVA table.
So we'll do ANOVA for
this linear model, run that,
which gives us the analysis
of variance table.
It indicates to us the results
of a statistical test for
each factor variable,
whether that factor variable
significantly contributes to
the variability in the data.
It does this by calculating
the variability between the factors
versus the variability within the factors.
If this is a large ratio then we
would say that the factor variable
does significantly contribute
to the variability in the data.
In this case, it gives a p value of
0.016 which is marginally significant.
Let's now fit a Bayesian model in Jags.
The model we'll use now is the cell means
model, where each group gets its own mean.
The model string which
I've already included here
starts with the likelihood as
usual where y[i] comes from
a normal distribution where
mu [i] has another index.
First, to know which mu is active for
the [i] person,
we need to extract a group number.
grp[i] will evaluate to a number group 1,
2,
0, or 3, which will tell us which
mu to use for the ith person.
We'll use a constant variance or
in this case precision.
And for each of the three cell means we'll
use a fairly non-informative normal prior.
In our prior for the variance,
we'll use an inverse gamma with
five observations as our
effective prior sample size.
And the prior guess on
the variance of 1.0.
That would be an inverse
gamma prior on the variance
which translates to a gamma
prior on the precision.
Instead of monitoring the precision,
let's monitor the standard deviation of
th observations using this calculation.
Below we have the standard set up for
a jags model.
First, lets look at the structure of
the PlantGrowth dataset where the first
variable.
The weight of the plants
is in numeric variable and
the second the group is
a factor with three levels.
When we put that data into
jags through data jags,
we need to turn that group
indicator into a numeric variable.
So we'll say
as.numeric(PlantGrowth$group),
let's see what that looks like.
It translates the three factors,
control, treatment 1 and
treatment 2 into numbers
where 1 represents control,
2 represents treatment 1 and
group 3 represents treatment 2.
This is the group variable that
will go right here in our model.
We're going to monitor mu and sigma.
We can give it initial
values which are optional.
We could just omit the initial values and
the jags model would create
initial values for us.
We'll run 1,000 iterations of burning.
We'll run our three chains for
5,000 iterations to save those samples and
then again,
we'll combine those samples at the end.
Let's run this model.
First, we need to load the rjags library.
And then we'll run the models.
Before we use the model,
let's check our convergence diagnostics.
First, we'll start with,
With our trace plots.
And in this case, they look really good.
And we'll check our Gelman and
Rubin statistics.
This potential scale reduction
factors are all essentially 1.
The autocorrelation is definitely
not a big problem here.
So we would imagine that the effect
of sample size will be large,
close to the actual size of the chain,
which is true.
So now that we're confident in our
Monte Carlo simulation from the posterior,
let's calculate the posterior mean for
the parameters.
Do that using the column
means based on the combined
simulations where they're
all in one matrix.
Let's take a look at
these posterior means.
And really quickly, let's compare those
to the coefficient estimates that we got
from the non-informative
reference analysis.
These results look pretty consistent.
The mu estimates for the control group
are similar between the two models.
The sal mean for treatment one which
you obtain by adding these two numbers
is very close to the treatment mean for
group two, estimated in our jags model.
And the treatment mean for
treatment two is also very similar if you
add .49 to .50, you get essentially
this number right here.
So, these two models are very consistent.
Let's use these posterior means of
the parameters to compute residuals.
The first thing we need are predictions
for each observation, call that y hat.
And it'll be based on
the posterior means for
these parameters for
the first three means.
And we want to index these
by their group indicator.
So that comes from datajags
the group variable.
Let's just remind ourselves
what's in the group variable.
This tells us that
observation 1 was in group 1.
Observation 11 was in group 2, observation
12 was in group 2, and so forth.
So what this line of code will
do is that the prediction for
observation 1 will be the posterior mean
for the mu of group because of this index.
The prediction for
observation 10 will be mu1,
the prediction for
observation 11 will be mu2 and so forth.
Let see if that's true.
We'll run that and
take a look at y hat and
we can see the first ten
observations are predicted to have
mean mu equal to the first group's mean.
This is true also for
groups two and three.
Once we have the predicted values,
we can calculate the residuals
[SOUND] as the difference
between the data and the predicted values.
Let's plot those residuals against
their index or observation number and
I don't see any patterns here,
this looks pretty good.
Next, we'll create a residual plot, where
the x-axis contains the predicted values.
Not surprisingly,
there are only three sets of predictions
because there are three groups.
But one thing that really stands out
is that the variance for this group,
the residual variance, is much higher than
the residual variance for this group.
As we mentioned earlier, it might be
appropriate to have a separate variance
parameter for each group, just like we had
a separate mu parameter for each group.
We'll let you do that as an exercise.
Let's now look at a summary of
our posterior distributions.
Summary(mod_sim) which gives us
the posterior means for the parameters,
which we've already seen, as well as
the posterior standard deviations.
Also, we have quantiles from
the posterior distributions.
For example, if we wanted to create.
A 95% posterior probability interval for
mu[1] associated with the control group.
It could be between this number and
this number.
If we wanted to create the highest
posterior density interval,
an HPDInterval,
which we discussed in the previous course.
It really is just what the name implies,
it's the interval associated with
the highest values of postural density.
We can use the HPDInterval function
from the code of package and it our mod
csim for out combined simulations,
which were all in one matrix.
Let's run that, and get a 95%
HPDinterval for each of the parameters.
Usually the HPDinterval is
slightly smaller than the interval
using equal tails.
We can also give it another argument.
If we want to change the posterior
probability associated with the interval,
we can change it to, for example, .9, and
we would get 90% posterior
probability intervals.
Now, suppose that in this experiment
we are interested should know
if one of the treatments increases
the mean yield from the plants.
It is clear from our posterior
summaries that treatment
1 does not increase,
plant yield over the control group.
But treatment 2 might increase it.
One major advantage of having
a Bayesian model with Monte Carlo
samples from the posterior
is that it is easy
to calculate posterior probabilities
of hypothesis like this.
So if we want to find out whether
treatment two produces a larger yield than
the control group,
let's create an indicator variable.
From our combined stimulations
Column 3 refers to mu 3.
We want to see if mu 3 is greater than
csim mu 1.
This will give us for
each sample in our Monte Carlo stimulation
whether the draw from mu 3 was
larger than the draw from mu 1.
We take the average of that,
that gives us the posterior probability.
Really fast,
let's just double check mod_csim.
Look at the head of this posterior
simulation to make sure we have the right
columns.
Column 1 is mu(1), Column 3 is mu(3).
So let's calculate this posterior
probability, it's about .94.
A very high posterior probability
that the main yield is greater for
treatment in group two
than the control group.
Now suppose that treatment
two would be costly
to put into production and
in order to be worthwhile.
This treatment must increase
the mean yield by at least 10%.
What is the posterior probability
that the increase is at least that?
Well we can easily do this with
posterior samples again and
we need mu three to be at
least 10% larger than mu one.
So it needs to be at least
as big as 1.1 times mu 1.
The posterior probability for
this hypothesis is about 0.48.
In other words, we have about
50-50 odds that adopting treatment
2 will increase the mean yield
of the plants by at least 10%.
It might be tempting to look
at a lot of comparisons or
test many hypotheses like these.
But we must warn you that this could yield
unreliable or non reproducible results.
Back when we discussed
the statistical modeling cycle.
We said that it is best not to search
your results for interesting hypotheses.
Because if there are many hypotheses,
some will appear to show effects or
associations simply due to chance.
Results are most reliable when
we determine a relatively
small number of hypotheses that
we're interested in beforehand.
Then we collect the data, and
then statistically evaluate
the evidence for them.